---
layout: post
title: "Learn More Python (classes and objects!)"
date: 2018-03-29
---

Some notes from exercises 40, 41 & 42 in [Learn Python the Hard Way](https://learnpythonthehardway.org/). The video for exercise 40 is where Zed reveals how he hasn’t yet taught _the most important thing_ in Python, which was actually cool for me to hear right now. I mean… no wonder I can’t build [a game]({{ '/2018/03/game/' | url }}) yet! 😜

## Object-Oriented

Thanks to Nicole Sullivan, I’m used to thinking about [OOCSS](https://www.slideshare.net/stubbornella/object-oriented-css). I have no idea how or if this compares to OOP in any way that is _useful_ for me, but that I am about to find out. Zed explains that OOP is “a&nbsp;convention to make components that can talk to each other”. Also why you don’t just use modules:

> You can take this MyStuff class and use it to craft many of them, millions at a time if you want, and each one won't interfere with each other.

### Intro to some words and concepts 🌱

- `class` is a container for a grouping that I can use as a blueprint
- `object` is what I get when I use a class to create a new instance of it
- `instantiate` is what I’ve done when I’ve used a class to create an object
- `self` is needed because in OOP I need a reference to what I am are working on
- `__init__` will initialize my newly created empty object

### Get a thing from another thing

There’s a pattern to recognize here on how to get things from other things.

```python
fromthis['wantthis'] # dictionary key=value
modulewhatever.somethingelse() # module key=value
blueprint.anotherthing # also a key=value when I have a class
```

### OOP and FP

I found an article on [CodeNewbie](https://www.codenewbie.org/blogs/object-oriented-programming-vs-functional-programming) with helpful explanations like:

> In all programs, there are two primary components: the data (the stuff a program knows) and the behaviors (the stuff a program can do to/with that data). OOP says that bringing together data and its associated behavior in a single location (called an “object”) makes it easier to understand how a program works. FP says that data and behavior are distinctively different things and should be kept separate for clarity.

---

`__init__` can be pronounced “dunder init dunder”. 💜 <br>
(About the origin: [wiki.python.org](https://wiki.python.org/moin/DunderAlias))

---

## Phrase drills

Exercise 41 has a script to help drill these phrases. You run it in the terminal to repeat either from code to English, or the other way around. With different random words from a list each time.

```python
# Make a class named Dinosaur that is-a Cactus
class Dinosaur(Cactus)
```

```python
# class Brick has-a __init__ that takes self and cherry params
class Brick(object):
    def __init__(self, cherry)
```

```python
# class Cabbage has-a function named Book that takes self and drum params
class Cabbage(object):
    def Book(self, drum)
```

```python
# Set actor to an instance of class Celery
actor = Celery()
```

```python
# From dust, get the crayon function, and call it with params self, detail
dust.crayon(detail)
```

```python
# From approval, get the brain attribute, and set it to Coal
approval.brain = Coal
```

Random nonsense words in this script was super helpful. I’ve seen this a lot from both learning and teaching — that as a beginner, you get tripped up on which words are from the language, and which are just something we name as we code. So when teaching non-coders their very first HTML/CSS, I&nbsp;now use obviously random silly words to take the focus away from class naming.

---

Exercise 42 starts to introduce these concepts:

| **inheritance**<br> a class can inherit traits from another class | is-a |
| **composition**<br> a class can be composed of other classes as parts | has-a |

> You use the phrase is-a when you talk about objects and classes being related to each other by a class relationship. You use has-a when you talk about objects and classes that are related only because they reference each other.
