---
layout: post
title:  "Go through that CLI crash course"
date:   2017-12-27 12:00:00 +0200
---

Ah, yes. Zed Shaw’s **Command Line Crash Course**. I have “been meaning to” go through it the past 2½ yrs. But I guess that, as always, ✨now✨ is better than never. I’ve already picked up parts of this along the way, but there was plenty to learn more properly and intentionally now.

🎓 Commands I was not so much acquainted with yet:

* `pushd` push directory
* `popd` pop directory
* `cp` copy a file or directory
* `mv` move a file or directory
* `less` page through a file
* `xargs` execute arguments
* `apropos` find which man page is appropriate
* `env` look at your environment
* `export` export/set a new environment variable
* `exit` exit the shell

---

### Moar notes

`cd Palermo/'places to eat'` for spaces in directory names <br>
`cd Palermo/places\ to\ eat` or I can escape the space like this<br>
`cd ../../` for navigating up two levels

`mkdir -p` to make the path with new directories <br>
`touch` makes a new empty file (unless it already exists)

`ls -R` to list content and subdirectories <br>
`ls -lR` same with long listing format <br>
`ls something/` to list the content of a dir

`pushd` will save this dir for later, but for now go here<br>
`popd` takes me back to the last saved dir

`cp -r` to copy directories with files

`rm -r` remove directories and contents recursively, so be careful!<br>
also if empty directory but what-a-minute hello `.DS_Store` then:<br>
`rm -rf` will force / ignore nonexistent files

`xargs` read a bit, sort of understand what it can do, but not quite when I need this yet.

`chmod` change mode! I remember this from working with file permissions in WordPress <br>
`chown` change owner!

---

### What now?

* [Bash Reference Manual](http://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/bashref.html)
* Also note to self; it was not that long ago you had to find out [wtf is bash anyway?!]({{ site.baseurl }}/2017/08/wtf-is-bash-anyway/)
* Revisit these notes as needed and put the commands to use already.
