---
layout: post
title:  "Manage keyboard focus"
date:   2017-12-19 12:00:00 +0200
---

I want to 100% understand this properly. Let’s go.

I know there’s a tabindex attribute, but haven’t used it. Mostly because I am aware that you should be careful with it, and have heard a lot over the years about it’s misuse. And also because I haven’t really  needed or wanted to change the default tab order. The MDN page for [tabindex](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/tabindex) jumps right in as a reference, and I can tell there’s something else I need to read up on first.

Yes! Here it is. Léonie Watson has written about [Using the tabindex attribute](https://developer.paciellogroup.com/blog/2014/08/using-the-tabindex-attribute/) which explains nicely how keyboard interaction works.

## Interactive HTML elements

Right, these are focusable by default. Which are they again? The most relevant for me to think about right now are:
`<a>`, `<button>`, `<input>`, `<label>`, `<select>`, `<textarea>`.

`<input type="hidden">` is not focusable — but all the others like `<input type="text">`, `<input type="checkbox">`, `<input type="radio">` and so on.

Oh, and also `<details>` 💕 which btw is the coolest HTML element I had never heard about until recently. But with a bright future: [the Details disclosure element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/details).

## Tabindex and styling focus

No need for tabindex on elements that are focusable by default. But for elements that are not interactive, setting the attribute with a value `0` will add it to the tab order.

A user can focus on `<div tabindex=0>` and I can style it with the `:focus` pseudo-class. This&nbsp;element will now also inherit focus styles from the user agent stylesheet.

### tabindex negative 👌

Setting an element to `tabindex=-1` or an other negative integer, makes it programatically focusable, but not included in the tab order. A user can’t reach it, but scripting can.

### tabindex positive 🚫

Nope. Don‘t do this. Fix your markup instead.

---

That’s it. Why did I think there was more here I didn’t already know?! 🤔
