---
layout: post
title:  "Decode Bytes and Encode Strings"
date: 2018-01-10
---

Notes from [Learn Python The Hard Way](https://learncodethehardway.org/python/) 🐍 <br>
(continued after [ex 1–19]({{ '/2017/12/python/' | url }}) &
[ex 20-22]({{ '/2017/12/more-python/' | url }}))

Now: exercise 23 about “Strings, Bytes, and Character Encodings”.

---

Detour to read Vaidehi Joshi’s post on [Bits, Bytes, Building With Binary](https://medium.com/basecs/bits-bytes-building-with-binary-13cb4289aafa). I get how computers only know 1s and 0s, also the basics of what binary is. I&nbsp;remember math projects around age 11 where we did a lot of counting and converting. I’m not 100% sure if I’m able to convert from base 10 into binary efficiently if my life depended on it today, but I’m okay with that at the moment.

Just like a [power of 10](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_of_10) in the decimal system — we’ve got a [power of two](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_of_two) in binary.

> A single digit in binary is known as a binary digit.

8 bits (8 digits) is a byte

> A byte is so common in the way that computers interpret binary that it is considered a unit of computer memory.

(This [basecs series](https://github.com/vaidehijoshi/basecs-series) is amazing, looking foreward to go through the other topics she explains.)

---

Back to the python exercise:

## Character Encoding

Unicode is not new for me, and I’ve dealt with encoding issues plenty over the years. (Hello Norwegian letters æ, ø, å!) But getting a better understanding of bits was cool.

* first there was ASCII, but 256 characters is not enough past English
* Unicode was created to solve the problem with 32 bits available

> A 32-bit number means we can store 4,294,967,295 characters (2^32), which is enough space for every possible human language and probably a lot of alien ones too. Right now we use the extra space for important things like poop and smile emojis.


* most common characters only need 8 bits
* but we can then escape out into 16 or 32 as needed
* Unicode Transformation Format 8 Bits 👉 `utf-8`
* …is a convention for encoding Unicode characters into bytes


`b''` is a byte string

Here with raw bytes on the left — and cooked on the right — this is 8, 16 and 32.<br>
(I don't understand now why 8 is longer than 16 for Simplified Chinese.)

```
b'Espa\xc3\xb1ol' <===> Español
b'Norsk bokm\xc3\xa5l' <===> Norsk bokmål
b'\xe4\xb8\xad\xe6\x96\x87' <===> 中文
```

```
b'\xff\xfeE\x00s\x00p\x00a\x00\xf1\x00o\x00l\x00' <===> Español
b'\xff\xfeN\x00o\x00r\x00s\x00k\x00 \x00b\x00o\x00k\x00m\x00\xe5\x00l\x00' <===> Norsk bokmål
b'\xff\xfe-N\x87e' <===> 中文
```

```
b'\xff\xfe\x00\x00E\x00\x00\x00s\x00\x00\x00p\x00\x00\x00a\x00\x00\x00\xf1\x00\x00\x00o\x00\x00\x00l\x00\x00\x00' <===> Español
b'\xff\xfe\x00\x00N\x00\x00\x00o\x00\x00\x00r\x00\x00\x00s\x00\x00\x00k\x00\x00\x00 \x00\x00\x00b\x00\x00\x00o\x00\x00\x00k\x00\x00\x00m\x00\x00\x00\xe5\x00\x00\x00l\x00\x00\x00' <===> Norsk bokmål
b'\xff\xfe\x00\x00-N\x00\x00\x87e\x00\x00' <===> 中文
```

---

## 🤖&ensp;got bytes, need string? decode!<br>💁‍♀️&ensp;got string, need bytes? encode!

This makes sense, sort like encrypting can make a text less readable for me — but decrypting makes it something humans can understand.
