---
layout: post
title: "Hello Ruby My Old Friend"
date: 2021-11-18
---

I’ve not directly been programming Ruby — so “old friend” is a stretch. But I’ve poked at UI code inside Ruby apps, and needed to run them locally. And I had years using Jekyll for various blogs, including this one. I see now that I figured out a lot when [setting up a new MacBook]({{ '/2017/09/new-macbook/' | url }}) four years ago. I should have checked out those notes earlier this week, when I was prepping my work laptop for Ruby. 😅

Previously, I’ve preferred to set up a version manager from the start — not waiting to see if the need for different Ruby versions appear. It doesn’t happen at convenient times. I’m guessing it wildly depends if the need is inevitable or not, but this is either way just one of those things I have liked to prepare for. Being ready to install and easily switch between different versions, all set up and ready to go.

The README for [`rbenv`](https://github.com/rbenv/rbenv) is really good. It’s got the best explanation of PATH and shims I know about. The way the steps are set up tripped me up a bit though, at one point I thought I had installed Ruby when I had only run a command to _list_ available stable versions. Command and recipe cheat sheet:

## Check current status

- `brew list` to check if there is something related to Ruby there already
- Will `ruby -v` show me the older version that came with the system? Yes
- See that `which ruby` returns `/usr/bin/ruby` for the system Ruby
- `gem env` also shows a lot of stuff!

## Set up the version manager

1. Install rbenv with `brew install rbenv`
2. Run `rbenv init`
3. Follow the instructions in the output from that command
4. Open a new terminal window
5. Verify with the rbenv-doctor script from the README 🟢

## Install and set a Ruby version

- Install a Ruby version, for example with `rbenv install 3.0.2`
- Set version! For example with `rbenv global 3.0.2`
- …or `rbenv local 2.7.4` for a specific project

## Check updated status

- `brew list` will now show both rbenv and ruby-build
- `ruby -v` will now return the specific version that I set
- `rbenv version` will return the current version of Ruby
- `rbenv versions` lists version(s) of Ruby known to rbenv on my laptop
- `rbenv --version` to see the version of rbenv itself
- `gem env` to inspect new Ruby setup and check differences from before
- `ls -la` is my friend to follow which hidden directories and files are created
- `cat .rbenv/version` will show that 3.0.2 is set globally

---

I like meticulously checking what’s what and where, comparing before and after. This makes it easier to understand what I’m actually doing — instead of throwing random commands out and hoping for the best. When I learn what is where and why, I am also capable of debugging when something goes wrong.
