---
layout: post
title: "Valgrind and Memory Issues"
date: 2021-09-28
---

The last remaining bug to slay in my [spell-checker for CS50]({{ '/2021/08/cs50/' | url }}) — after making sure my [hash function was implemented properly]({{ '/2021/09/hash-functions/' | url }}) — is a memory issue. The program works, finds the correct number of misspelled words. But the CS50 bot that checks submissions isn’t going to give a full score yet.

[Valgrind](https://www.valgrind.org/info/about.html) is a suite of tools, where [Memcheck](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valgrind#Memcheck) is the default and most used.

> detects memory-management problems, and is aimed primarily at C and C++ programs. When a program is run under Memcheck's supervision, all reads and writes of memory are checked, and calls to malloc/new/free/delete are intercepted.

I am using the CS50 IDE, where Valgrind is already installed. So directly out of the box: I&nbsp;can add `valgrind` to the beginning of the command to run my program with Memcheck.

- Quick Start Guide: [Interpreting Memcheck's output](https://www.valgrind.org/docs/manual/quick-start.html)
- Manual: [Explanation of error messages from Memcheck](https://www.valgrind.org/docs/manual/mc-manual.html)

---

## Braindump of the debugging 🐛

There is a lot of output, but the parts that look relevant are:

```
Invalid read of size 8
  Address 0x4b9a550 is 48 bytes inside a block of size 56 free'd

HEAP SUMMARY:
  in use at exit: 472 bytes in 1 blocks
  total heap usage: 12 allocs, 11 frees, 10,552 bytes allocated

ERROR SUMMARY: 7 errors from 1 contexts
```

Not sure I am reading this correctly, but… 8 bytes? Does this sounds like some sort of off-by-one error? 🤔 That was the reduced test case with tiny dictionary and short text. What will the output be with the large dictionary and longer text…?

```
Invalid read of size 8
  Address 0x5d11af0 is 48 bytes inside a block of size 56 free'd

HEAP SUMMARY:
  in use at exit: 472 bytes in 1 blocks
  total heap usage: 143,096 allocs, 143,095 frees, 8,023,256 bytes allocated
```

Still a single alloc more than blocks free'd. Hm. My theory is that there is something off in the details of how I am traversing the linked lists and calling `free()` on the nodes.

- Is my `for` loop looping 1 too few or 1 too many times? No.
- Also played around with replacing a `while` loop with a `do...while` and hey, got a segmentation fault. Which was fun to see in the Memcheck output like this:

```
Address 0x30 is not stack'd, malloc'd or (recently) free'd

Process terminating with default action of signal 11 (SIGSEGV)
Access not within mapped region at address 0x30
```

Time to check if everything is working as it should with the `cursor` variable that moves the pointer to the next node in the linked list. I’ve got a `tmp` which is what I call `free()` on, so I don’t _think_ I’m loosing the rest of the linked list after the first node. But ah, I was moving the pointer and free-ing in the wrong order. Fixed! And voilà:

```
HEAP SUMMARY:
  in use at exit: 472 bytes in 1 blocks
  total heap usage: 12 allocs, 11 frees, 10,552 bytes allocated

 LEAK SUMMARY:
  definitely lost: 0 bytes in 0 blocks
  indirectly lost: 0 bytes in 0 blocks
  possibly lost: 0 bytes in 0 blocks
  still reachable: 472 bytes in 1 blocks
  suppressed: 0 bytes in 0 blocks

ERROR SUMMARY: 0 errors from 0 contexts
```

So 0 errors, but still an issue. Beginning to feel confident-ish in my unload function, so maybe the bug is in my load function? That I am alloc'ing more that I should? Hm. No.

Noooooooooooo… 🤦🏻‍♀️ Or rather… yay? Because now I know _exactly what_ is still reachable. Lets just say that I will never ever again forget to `fclose()` 😂

```
All heap blocks were freed -- no leaks are possible
```

## Spell Checker Submitted 🍾

Yay.

---

## What I Learnt Today 🎓

- How to use Valgrind and a bit about reading the output
- Always remeber to close files!
- Not all memory issues are memory leaks
